=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Perl::Version::Bumper::Caveat - Do's and don't of C<use VERSION>

=head1 Differences between C<use>, C<no>, C<require> C<VERSION>

=head2 C<use VERSION>

Technically, this checks that the C<perl> I<binary> is at least
the requested version. It also loads the corresponding
L<feature/"FEATURE BUNDLES"> and L<builtin/"Version Bundles">.

=head2 C<no VERSION>

Quoting from L<perlfunc/"use VERSION">:

I<
Care should be taken when using the C<no VERSION> form, as it is I<only>
meant to be used to assert that the running Perl is of an earlier version
than its argument and I<not> to undo the feature-enabling side effects
of C<use VERSION>.
>

=head2 C<require VERSION>

Demands a version of Perl specified by VERSION.

A runtime exception is raised if VERSION is greater than
the version of the current Perl interpreter. 

          An exception is raised if VERSION is greater than the version of
            the current Perl interpreter. Compare with "use", which can do a
            similar check at compile time.

in particular, does not enable the features / builtins


=head1 Comparisons involving C<$]> or C<$^V>

Comparing the perl runtime version: useful to work around bugs



# Preamble

Pay attention to the case of words!  In this document:
* `perl` (lowercase, monospace) is the _binary_, i.e. the actual program that
  compile and runs your Perl code
* Perl (initial capital) is the _language_, i.e. the baseline of features
  a `use VERSION` line declares

The version of the binary and the version of the language mean slightly
different things.

# Perl's own knowledge of its features

New Perl language features are introduced over time, and newer `perl`s
learn about them as they are introduced.

For example, this code:

```
use v5.10;
use feature 'lexical_subs';
```

=over 4

=item *

will die on any `perl` that doesn't know about the `lexical_subs` feature
(i.e. all of them up until version v5.18)

=item *

will compile (and run) fine on any `perl` that knows about it

=back

The "Perl language" that the rest of the file works with:

=over 4

=item *

knows about C<say>, C<state>, C<switch> (the C<switch> keywords will throw a
warning in the C<deprecated> category when used on any C<perl> after
v5.18)

=item *

knows about lexical subroutines

=back

This is a 

When a new feature is introduced in Perl, it usually is marked as
"experimental" (meaning, warnings will be emitted when loading the
feature, unless the corresponding `experimental::` warning is explicitely
disabled).  (Note: the `experimental` module combines loading the feature
and disabling the warning in one single line of code.)

Once the feature is deemed stable, it autotically enabled by all the
feature bundles that come after that. The experimental warning is also
disabled.

Some features do not go through an experimental phase. For example:
`say`, `state`, `module_true` where all enabled in the same bundle as
the version that introduced them.

# Bumping Perl versions

Running this code:

```
use v5.10;    # just need 'say'
use Perl::Version::Bumper;
say Perl::Version::Bumper->new->bump( << 'CODE' );
use v5.10;
use feature 'signatures';
CODE
```

will produce different results depending on the version of
`perl` running it.

With `perl5.16.3`, we get:
```
use v5.16;
```
because `perl5.16` doesn't even know about the `signatures`
feature (which was introduced in Perl v5.20).

With `perl5.22.4`, we get:
```
use v5.22;
use feature 'signatures';
```
because `perl5.22.4` knows about the `signatures` feature
(which was actually introduced in Perl v5.20), and also that
it's still experimental in the `:5.22` feature bundle.

With `perl5.40.0`, we get:
```
use v5.40;
```
because the `:5.36` feature bundle enabled the `signatures` feature
by default.


-----



This code:

    use feature 'signatures';

will die with any stable perl before perl5.20.0, because the binary does not
know about the feature itself.  However, that should not prevent a
perl5.20.0 to bump it to any version of the language.

The above code will work on any perl that knows about the feature, and
only enable signatures, but not `say`, or any other post-v5.10 feature.

When writing code like this:

    use v5.10;
    use feature 'signatures';

one is opting into a version of the Perl language that is not described
by any specific feature bundle. However, any perl that knows about the
`signatures` feature will know how to run it.
