=encoding utf8

=pod

=head1 NAME

Perl::Version::Bumper::Rationale - or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bump

=head1 TL;DR:

Forget about C<use strict; use warnings;>, just C<use VERSION;>!

=head1 C<use VERSION>


=head1 My recommendation

=over 4

=item 1.

L<Pick a version|/Picking a Perl version> of the Perl language that is
the most suited for your use case.

=item 2.

Add the appropriate C<use VERSION> line at the I<top> of all of your Perl
programs and modules.

(Starting with version 1.154 (October 2024),
L<Perl::Critic> won't count this as a violation of
L<Perl::Critic::Policy::Modules::RequireExplicitPackage>.)

=item 3.

Profit!

=head1 Picking a Perl version

From the less to the most constrained:

=head2 Personal code

      Release date      Perl version
    ----------------------------------
      2021-05-21        v5.34  
      2022-05-27        v5.36  
      2023-07-02        v5.38  
      2024-06-09        v5.40  

=head2 Company code

=head2 Open source Perl application

Know your target. Pick a version of Perl that is packaged by default with the releases of the OS

For Windows, that's basically the latest version of Strawberry Perl
L<https://strawberryperl.com/>

Here's a list per OS, compiled in December 2024:

      Release date    Operating system    Perl version
    ----------------------------------------------------
      2021-04-13      FreeBSD 13          v5.36 *
      2021-08-14      Debian 11           v5.32
      2022-04-21      Ubuntu 2022.04      v5.34
      2023-06-10      Debian 12           v5.36
      2023-11-20      FreeBSD 14
      2024-02-14      NetBSD 9
      2024-03-28      NetBSD 10           v5.38
      2024-04-05      OpenBSD 7.5         v5.36
      2024-04-23      Fedora 40           v5.38
      2024-04-25      Ubuntu 2024.04      v5.38
      2024-07-25      Linux Mint 22
      2024-10-08      OpenBSD 7.6         v5.38
      2024-10-10      Ubuntu 2024.10      v5.38
      2024-10-29      Fedora 41           v5.40
                      Mageia 9            v5.36
                      RedHat

=head2 CPAN modules

L<Perl::Version::Bumper>, for example, is written in the v5.10 dialect of Perl,
for maximal utility. The point is to help developers make the jump from really
ancient versions of Perl to more modern ones.

=head1 REFERENCES

=over 4

=item *

L<https://perladvent.org/2024/2024-12-22.html>

My first attempt at writing this down was published in the
L<Perl Advent Calendar 2024|https://perladvent.org/2024/> entry
for December 22, 2024. This was far longer than the average for
Advent Calendar entries, however some deemed it an
L<"excellent read"|https://www.reddit.com/r/perl/comments/1hjp60t/perl_advent_calendar_2024_day_22_a_yearly/>. Thanks!

=item *

L<https://blogs.perl.org/users/psc/2022/05/what-happened-to-perl-7.html>

I<What happened to Perl 7?> is the 2021-2022 Perl Steering Council blog
post that recommends C<use v5.36> as a good baseline for Perl code,
and also introduced the notion of "line 0".

=item *

L<https://sheet.shiar.nl/perl>

This I<Perl release summary> page records the most significant features
introduced for each version of Perl since v5.6.

=item *

L<Syntax::Construct>

This module provides a simple way of specifying syntactic constructs that
are not implemented via the feature pragma, but are still not compatible
with older versions of Perl.

More relevant here, its list of
L<recognized constructs|https://metacpan.org/pod/Syntax::Construct#RECOGNISED-CONSTRUCTS>
is a good complement to the I<Perl release summary> linked above.

=item *

L<perlexperiment>

This document lists the current and past experimental features in the
perl core. This succinct listing gives an overview and basic facts about
their status.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Philippe Bruhat (BooK) C<< <book@cpan.org> >>.

=cut

=cut

__END__
=encoding utf8

=head1 Perl Versions

To quote L<perlfaq1/What's the difference between "perl" and "Perl"?>:

I<
"Perl" is the name of the language. Only the "P" is capitalized.
The name of the interpreter (the program which runs the Perl script)
is "perl" with a lowercase "p".
>

I<
You may or may not choose to follow this usage. But never write "PERL",
because perl is not an acronym.
>

The version of C<perl> (the interpreter) is what you get when you
type C<perl -v> on the command-line:

    $ perl -v
    This is perl 5, version 40, subversion 0 (v5.40.0) built for x86_64-linux-gnu
    
    Copyright 1987-2024, Larry Wall
    
    Perl may be copied only under the terms of either the Artistic License or the
    GNU General Public License, which may be found in the Perl 5 source kit.
    
    Complete documentation for Perl, including FAQ lists, should be found on
    this system using "man perl" or "perldoc perl".  If you have access to the
    Internet, point your browser at https://www.perl.org/, the Perl Home Page.

or simply run this (the interpreter version is available in two different
formats, either as a floating-point number, or a v-string):

    $ perl -E 'say for $], $^V'
    5.040000
    v5.40.0

After this introduction, you should pay attention to the case of words
in the rest of this document.  As explained above, C<perl> (lowercase,
monospace) is the I<binary>, i.e. the actual program that compiles and
runs your Perl code, whereas Perl (initial capital) is the I<language>.

The version of the language is a somewhat more complicated topic,
as we'll explore below.

=head2 Perl features

As you may know, Perl is extremely backwards compatible. This means that
sensibly-written code from 20 years ago should still run under the
next release of Perl. In other words, any C<perl> interpreter should
understand code written against older versions of the Perl I<language>
just fine. As I have personally experimented, this actually even applies
to scripts targetting the Perl 4 language!

With such a strong commitment to backwards compatibility, how does
one even introduce new features to the language? To quote from
L<feature/DESCRIPTION>:

I<
It is usually impossible to add new syntax to Perl without breaking some
existing programs. This pragma provides a way to minimize that risk.
>

The L<feature> module was introduced in Perl v5.10, to make it possible
to introduce new features to the language without breaking existing
scripts. A typical example would be the C<say> feature, which makes it
possible to add the C<say> keyword to the language without breaking
older scripts that might have defined a C<sub say>.

If one wanted to use the C<say> builtin, they would write:

    use feature 'say';
    say "Hello, world!";

And of course, code that already has a C<say> subroutine defined
would continue to work the same, as long as the feature is not
enabled. This leaves time to the code's author to look at their code
and decide if they want to update it to take advantage of new
features of the language.

Note that enabling features always happens in the current lexical scope.

=head1 C<use VERSION>

A special case of the C<use> builtin is C<use VERSION>. It performs
several operations:

=head2 Enforce running with a minimum version of the perl binary

The first thing that C<use VERSION> does is to declare which minimum
version of C<perl> (the interpreter) you expect to run your code. If you
demand a version that is larger than that of the perl binary running
your code, it's going to die at compile time.

    $ perl -Mv5.38 -e1
    Perl v5.38.0 required--this is only v5.36.0, stopped.
    BEGIN failed--compilation aborted.

Although the version in C<use VERSION> can be written in either v-string
style (C<v5.36>) or numeric style (C<5.036>), it is strongly recommended
to use the former, as it's more readable and matches with the way people
talk about Perl versions. (Unless the code is expected to actually be
run on a C<perl> older than v5.8, which was released in 2002).

=head2 Load the corresponding feature bundle

The C<feature> module also defines "feature bundles", which allow to
load multiple features together. (See L<feature/FEATURE-BUNDLES> for
their definitions.)

The special C<use VERSION> construct will implicitly load the
corresponding feature bundle. For example:

   use v5.10;

is equivalent to:

   use feature ':5.10';

and will enable the C<say>, C<state> and C<switch> features. The
compiler will now understand the corresponding keywords, and behave
accordingly. Error messages might differ a lot when a feature is
enabled or not.

In addition to the implicit loading of features, C<use v5.12;> or
greater will enable C<strict>, C<use v5.36;> (actually v5.35) will
enable C<warnings> and C<use v5.40;> (actually, v5.39) will import
L<builtin> functions (using a similar version bundle scheme: see
L<builtin/Version-Bundles>).

Note that this is a lexical pragma, meaning that you could declare
different version bundles for different parts of your code. For
consistency, it's really recommended that you pick one version, and
stick with it for the entire file. In fact, a future release of C<perl>
will disallow changing the version once one has been declared. So,
really, don't do that.

The features included in bundles fall in two broad categories:
new features, and deprecated features. Loading a bundle will perform
the following two operations in a single line of code:

=head3 Enable modern Perl features

Perl features are generally used to introduce experimental features
without making them part of the "official" language. Features become
official when they are included in a feature bundle. Failed experiment
can be removed.

For example, the C<signatures> feature was introduced in C<perl> v5.20,
and remained experimental until v5.34. That meant that, as long as the
C<perl> binary was more recent than v5.20, one could use signatures in
their code with C<use feature 'signatures';>. That specific feature has
been added to all bundles since C<:5.36>, which means that a single
declaration (C<use v5.36>, or any later version) allows to write Perl
subroutines using signatures.

Not all new features have to wait that long to become part of the
language: C<module_true> was introduced in C<perl> v5.38, and was
immediately added to the C<:5.38> feature bundle.

=head3 Deprecate discouraged features

Bundles have also been used to deprecate and disabled features that have
become discouraged. These are made part of the C<:default> feature bundle,
and not included in later bundles.

Doing it this way makes it possible to preserve the behaviour of
ancient, unmaintained, scripts and modules. Even if they load some
feature bundle (via C<use VERSION>), any deprecated feature they might
use will also be (retroactively) included in that bundle, preserving
backward compatibitlity.

This is how the features C<indirect>, C<multidimensional> and
C<bareword_filehandles> came to be "removed" from later versions of Perl.

This is the strategy the L<Perl Steering Council|perlgov/The Steering Council>
has chosen to best stretch the language between the continuous
introduction of new features and the preservation of backwards
compatibility. For the record, many Perl 4 (which is actually Perl 3,
from late 1989) scripts still run fine with perl 5.40.

=head1 Why Bump?

=head2 Line 0 semantics

When C<perl> compiles Perl code, before it even reads the first byte of
source code, it is in "Perl v5.8 compatibility mode". The C<:default>
bundle is implicitely loaded (it only contains features that are
backward-compatible with traditional Perl).

This means that the "sensibly-written code from 20 years ago" mentioned
above is very likely to just run unmodified, and simply work.

=head2 Line 1 semantics

As explained above, C<use VERSION> automatically loads the corresponding
feature bundle (and associated builtins). This single line of code enables
all official features and disables all deprecated features for the given
version of the Perl language.

In other words, putting a C<use VERSION> line at the top (line 1) of a
Perl script of module I<declares> which version of the I<Perl language>
the code that follows is written under. And because the effect is lexical,
a script can load other modules that declare they were written against
a different version of the language, and everything works transparently.

=head2 Declaring a baseline of the Perl language

For decades, the first recommendation made to Perl beginners and people
asking for help on a Perl forum was to add C<use strict; use warnings;>
at the beginning of their code. This made Perl more helpful, as it
would point to likely errors in programming (like undeclared variables
or undefined values).

Since Perl v5.36, these two statements are implicitely included inr
C<use VERSION>. It also enables the official features of that version
of the language, and disables the deprecated ones.

Therefore, C<use VERSION> helps define a good I<baseline> for the Perl
language, so that the compiler can fully understand the code that follows.
It's of course possible to include experimental features, or re-enable
deprecated feature (the latter is really not recommended), to fine-tune
the specific dialect of Perl that the code is written in.

Future version of C<perl> implicitely promise that they will understand
the dialect of Perl declared by C<use VERSION>, and that they will run
it to the best of their abilities.

=head1 The Once and Future Perl

If you use Perl in 2024, you don't have to write code like the dot-com
bubble is about to burst. (Be wary of the AI bubble, though...)

You can easily signal your code was written in the last decade,
and enjoy the recent evolutions of the language.

=head2 The new "use strict and warnings"

Since the time of "use strict and warnings" as minimum requirements for
decent Perl code, the language has evolved, and brought in more useful
features. It also deprecated ancient features that were deemed bad ideas
in a modern context (such as the indirect object notation).

Writing C<use VERSION> as the first (active) line of any Perl code
will I<declare> to the C<perl> interpreter (and to whoever is reading
the code) which version of the Perl I<language> the code that follows
is written in.

So, just put a C<use VERSION> line at the top of all your Perl files.

Whenever a new stable version is released (which happens every year
towards the end of May), you should at least read the L<perldelta> that
accompanies it, and check if you see some new feature you think you'd
want to use.

There might exist some compatibility modules that you can use,
to get a taste of those new features on version of C<perl>
that doesn't support them natively. They might behave slightly
differently, though.

C<v5.36> (released in May 2022) contains a very good mix of
stable features (default C<strict> and C<warnings>, C<signatures>,
C<isa>), as well as the removal of deprecated features (C<indirect>,
C<multidimensional>).

In 2024, the main Linux distributions all include a version of Perl that
will support C<use v5.36;>.

=head2 Picking which version of Perl to code in

The version of the Perl language you want to use will depend on the
context in which the code is run. Private or proprietary code has
different constraints than an Open Source project or library code
distributed on CPAN.

Private or company code is only limited by the version of Perl used
internally. It might be the stock C<perl> from the operating system
selected by the organization. It might be a C<perl> compiled specifically
for that purpose. Internal company or personal code can run on the
bleeding edge!

An Open Source project will usually be shipped with or installed on top
of common operating systems, and will usually be tied to the version of
C<perl> they package.

The authors of modules distributed via CPAN distributions might want
their code run on a broader selection of C<perl> versions.

However, you're unlikely to be able to start writing code with the
latest version of the language very quickly, though:

=over 4

=item *

maybe you're stuck with the version released by your OS vendor
(but, do you know how easy it is to compile your own Perl?);

=item *

maybe you compile your own Perl, but it's a core part of your
infrastructure, and upgrading takes time; (although the Perl parts are
likely to be the easiest ones, given Perl's track record with backward
and forward compatibility)

=item *

maybe you're a CPAN author, and you still want to support older
versions of Perl.

=back

=head2 Perl Maintenance Policy

The L<Perl 5 Porters|perlpolicy/Perl 5 Porters> "officially" support
the two most recent stable release series.

See also L<perlpolicy/BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY AND DEPRECATION>.

=head2 Toolchain Maintenance Policy

To quote L<The Lyon Amendment to the Lancaster
Consensus|https://github.com/Perl-Toolchain-Gang/toolchain-site/blob/master/lyon-amendment.md>:

I<
No new release of a distribution in the Perl toolchain will specify a
minimum perl prerequisite version (whether configure, build, runtime,
or test) that has been available for less than ten years.
>

With stable perl version having even minor numbers, this means that once
Perl v5.40 has been published, the I<maximum> version a toolchain module
will require is v5.20. Toolchain authors are usually quite conservatives,
so you'll definitely see requirements for older versions of the language.

=head1 AUTHOR

Philippe Bruhat (BooK) C<< <book@cpan.org> >>.

=cut
